---
layout: post
title:  "Is anyone in charge here?"
date:   2019-08-27
categories: update
---

[My colleague Sydney Bufkin organized a panel on the topic of engaging women with technology in the classroom for my institution's two-week pre-semester workshop marathon and as a follow-up to last year's Women and Tech initiative. As one of the panelists, I was asked to share my challenges and strategies. I wrote the following in preparation for the panel.]

For those who don't know me, I'm the Digital Humanities Librarian here. I teach in the Digital Culture and Information program and work with students and faculty on digital methods for humanities research. Most of my remarks today come from a course I've taught a number of times - Data in the Humanities. Creating a learning environment where women would feel comfortable learning new technology was one of my priorities when I created this course four years ago. Today I will share some observations and challenges I've faced in this course and others along with my attempted solutions. Most of my recommendations are inspired by inclusive pedagogy and feminist pedagogy principles, so hopefully they are useful for a range of classrooms. My remarks come in two parts: first, I share some techniques for building a supportive and safe classroom environment. Second, I discuss the challenges I've faced while teaching technology *as a woman*.  

I want to preface my remarks by saying that it is not my intent to be reductive or binary when discussing gender roles in the classroom. I don't want to perpetuate stereotypes about our students. That being said, this is a fundamentally sexist campus where traditional gender roles are not a thing of the past, and I think we can and should be open about that in this discussion. 

First, women and men won't sit next to each other. This is the weirdest one! The obvious answer is to assign seats. I do a lot of group activities and I spend a lot of time arranging students in new groups. I wish I could say this always worked. I've even seen the gender divide persist on the last day of class in a room where every chair was on wheels! Plus, I never know what reasons they may have for avoiding one another. If we have a task that is particularly frustrating or requires vulnerability, perhaps it is best to leave them with the people they find comfortable. What has been successful is daily ice breakers. I teach in two hour blocks so there is time for this, but I have found this regular low-stakes sharing a great way to build community in class. Maybe knowing about each other's childhood Halloween costumes will inspire them care about each other's learning as well.

Second, some men will take advantage of women's willingness to do work. Likewise, women will feel burdened by having to work with men who don't contribute their share. I have this early classroom memory of a woman calling out the men in her group for making her take notes. I tried to support her in the moment, but it was a wake-up call for me to be conscious about how I create groups, and specifically the roles in those groups. If there are particular tasks to be conducted, can they be explicitly identified and assigned, or even rotated? Even when I pay attention to how groups are constructed, I have found that women will resent me for making them work with the men who don't contribute. Well after a student was out of my class, she said to me, "you always made me work with the slacker dudes and never Other Female Student!" This was a reminder to me to be more transparent and thoughtful with my methods. I do a lot of group work, but rarely group grades, for this reason. I don't want women to feel like they have to carry a team. I know what that's like and it's not fun. A friend of mine uses reading communities in her literature class - students stay with the same group for a whole unit and have a longer opportunity to build trust. That doesn't quite work with the structure of my course, but perhaps it could. 

Third, the guide on the side method can mean you're taken less seriously by both men and women, but for different reasons. The pedagogical practice of avoiding center stage and teaching through community sounds great - and it is - but it is not something that students are used to. Especially as a younger woman, I struggle with this! Last year, an older professor burst into my classroom (looking for her glasses) while a student was presenting. She looked around and said, "who's in charge here?" It was a funny moment, but it's stuck with me. It can be hard to be comfortable not being the expert. Especially since I spend a lot of time Googling the answers to the technology questions that students ask me. Ultimately, I am okay with this. I am modeling !!!!


It can be hard to sustain generosity when it feels taken advantage of. Men use this approach to test boundaries. Subsequently, women get upset that I'm not more of a disciplinarian. I have found that a student-generated charter will encourage self-policing of behavior. I have noticed a difference in the classes where I've used this approach. 

Finally, to actually talk about technology: I have found that men and women are equally willing to express their fears and concerns about technology to me. Hopefully this is due to some of my intentional practices, but maybe not. When I do get those senior CS majors who think they know everything already, I am careful not to heap them with praise. Instead, their ability begets responsibility. If they finish an exercise before everyone else, I task them with helping students who are having trouble. Their confidence benefits from the practice of explaining something to someone else. I encourage error messages so that students aren't embarrassed or frustrated by them. It's funny - when you're in the command line, successes are often literally unacknowledged. If you run a command and it works, often you see nothing. It's in those error messages where we actually learn something. I require a reflective assignment at the end of each unit so that students take a little time to process and think about what they've learned.

I also try to bring to light the variety of ways that one can engage with technology. The myth of the brogrammer is too strong. Technology is not just one thing. It's more than just sitting in misery through one Python class. There are many skills to be had, art to be created, critiques to be made. I try to show students that there's more to digital work than just "coding." Some students might be great at documentation, or 3D modeling, or engaging online communities. Similarly, I try to assign a variety of case studies, projects, and paper topics. Just as Digital Humanities gives us new methods for old questions, it also lets us turn our scholarly inquiry toward new questions and topics that did not exist ten years ago. I love assigning this [text analysis project on the Kardashians](http://dashamerikan.scholarslab.org/) because it shows them that pop culture can be subject to scholarly inquiry. If the goal is for my students to learn how to make a data-driven map, why can't it be about the hometowns of all 23 seasons of *The Bachelor*? 

For me, engaging women around technology in the classroom is about modeling behavior that helped me become a woman working in technology. It's about actually reading documentation, looking at error messages in a positive light, and finding your support network. 
